Introduction
Cassius King scanned the press release text for the millionth time, sighed, and with fingers interlocked on top of his head, leaned back in his Herman Miller Aeron desk chair. It was noon on July 20, 2004, and King, a senior analyst in the Microsoft Corporation treasury department, had been working with the company’s investor relations staff to craft an announcement for release after the market close. After more than a year of analysis, deliberation and meetings, the world’s most successful software company had finally decided how to distribute its $60 billion portfolio of cash and marketable securities.
Capitalizing on the rise of the personal computer and new investments in technology infrastructure and software, between 1985 and 2000 Microsoft posted compounded annual growth in sales and earnings of 40% and 49%, respectively. Under the leadership of Bill Gates, Paul Allen and Steve Ballmer, the company had been carried by the success of its Windows operating system and innovative software to become one of the great success stories in U.S. entrepreneurship.
Such unparalleled success brought both new opportunities and new risks. Microsoft had profitably redeployed billions of dollars of capital, expanding to numerous adjacent markets. But this success engendered rivalry and scrutiny. The company faced a new threat from open source Linux-based operating systems. And after nearly a decade of focus on the company’s increasing market power, on May 18, 1998 the U.S. Department of Justice, 20 states, and District of Columbia filed antitrust actions against Microsoft, culminating in the proposed breakup of Microsoft in 2000.
Microsoft was generating cash at the rate of $1 billion per month. Its cash balance had grown from
$14 billion at the end of fiscal 1998 to over $60 billion at the end of fiscal 2004. As highlighted in the key events timeline in Exhibit 1, when legislation had recently lowered the marginal tax rate on dividends to 15%, Microsoft took advantage of the change by paying its first ever dividend in January 2003.  Nevertheless, an increasingly agitated investor base wanted the company to return even more capital to owners. Microsoft’s treasury department had been arguing for a major cash disbursement for the past year, but Gates and Ballmer had balked; with a bias toward financial conservatism rooted in Microsoft’s start-up days, Gates and Ballmer maintained that cash should be kept as a safeguard against precipitous events.
The press release explains the three key aspects of their plan to pay out $75 billion over four years: subject to shareholder approval, Microsoft would 1) pay a one-time special dividend of $3.00 per share, for a total of $32 billion; 2) double the regular quarterly dividend from $0.04 to $0.08 per share, paying approximately $3.5 billion annually; and 3) repurchase up to $30 billion in MSFT shares over the next four years.
King, a graduate of Columbia Business School, was confident in his numbers, but not in the final decision. Were they correct to return cash to shareholders rather than reinvest it themselves? If so,



 

Page 1 | Cash is King
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
had they identified the optimal amount to return and the most efficient mix of dividends and share repurchases? It was certainly a high-class problem, but that had not made King’s task any easier.


Microsoft Corporation’s History
BIRTH OF THE MICROCOMPUTER AND THE EARLY YEARS OF MICROSOFT
Building on years of computer development for academic and commercial applications, by the 1970s computer enthusiasts were trying to piece together systems from parts purchased in electronics shops. With the advent of the Altair 8800 from Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems (MITS) of Albuquerque, New Mexico, billed as the “World’s First Minicomputer,” for only $395 hobbyists could purchase a kit with all the necessary parts. Once assembled, programs or data could be entered by setting the rows of toggle switches on the front. There was no keyboard, video terminal or paper tape reader, and all programming was in the machine code of binary digits. Results of programs were displayed by the flashing lights on the front panel, which served as the sole user interface.
Paul Allen, who was employed by Honeywell at the time, and his friend Bill Gates, a Harvard sophomore, were among the first to recognize that software would be the future of personal computing. Using the Altair’s specifications, they adapted the BASIC programming language to the new machine, and in February 1975 they licensed their new operating system to MITS. Within months Allen joined MITS as Director of Software, and Gates soon followed. Later that year, the two formed a partnership which eventually took the name of their first “Micro-soft” BASIC program.
The late 1970s were marked by many firsts in the nascent personal computing industry, including the introduction of the Apple I personal computer in 1976, priced at $666.66. Building on the success of BASIC, Microsoft broadened the capabilities of the personal computer. Gates and Ballmer officially executed a partnership agreement in February 1977, and with nine employees they generated revenue of $382,000 from licensing agreements that year.
By the 1980s, new competitors were rapidly entering the market with increasingly sophisticated applications, enabled by the development of faster and cheaper microprocessors. Apple Computer went public in 1980, issuing 4.6 million shares in what was the largest initial public offering since Ford Motor Company in 1956. That year, Novell, Inc. announced that it would develop network software, and one million computers were sold in the United States.
Partly in response to these new threats, in June 1980 Microsoft hired its first business manager, Steve Ballmer, to establish resource allocation and other business processes. At Harvard, Ballmer had lived down the hall from fellow Harvard sophomore Gates, before spending two years at Procter & Gamble as an assistant product manager and attending the Stanford Graduate School of Business.
The arrival of the 16-bit IBM personal computer in 1981 served to jump-start the modern era of computing. The industry was beginning to organize around two primary operating systems: Microsoft MS-DOS and the Apple Macintosh. But Microsoft was focused on making MS-DOS more accessible

 

Cash is King | Page 2
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
to new users. In November 1983, Microsoft unveiled Microsoft Windows, an extension of the MS- DOS operating system that provided a more user-friendly graphical operating environment emulating Apple Computer’s popular graphical user interface.
Microsoft’s international expansion was well under way. The company opened its first international sales office in Japan in 1978, followed by subsidiaries in France, Germany and the United Kingdom. In 1985, the company selected Ireland as the location of its first production facility outside the U.S., and the following year Microsoft opened Microsoft de Mexico, the first office established anywhere in Latin America by a U.S. software company.
In 1986, the company introduced Microsoft Works, integrating word processing, spreadsheet, database communications, and drawing functionality for the first time. Seeking to accelerate growth and reward its rapidly growing staff, the company raised $48 million in an initial public offering of
2.3	million MSFT shares on March 13, 1986. With an offering price of $21, shares rose to $28 by the end of the first trading day.  That year, Microsoft recorded revenues of $198 million.
WINDOWS TAKES HOLD
In April 1987, Microsoft introduced Windows version 2.0, which incorporated a host of important technical advances. Most significantly, version 2.0 boasted significant performance enhancements and a new visual appearance, including a system of overlapping windows.
By the following year, Microsoft had surpassed Lotus Development Corporation as the world’s largest software vendor. The company’s operating model continued to evolve. The applications division was reorganized into five business units: graphics, analysis, data access, office and entry. In another key business move, to accommodate its rapidly growing workforce, Microsoft’s manufacturing and distribution operations moved to a 260,000 square-foot facility in Bothell, Washington. The company’s executives expected the facility to provide room for five years of expansion, though within only two years they outgrew their new space.
When Windows 3.0 was introduced in May 1990 in New York, it was supported by the largest single marketing campaign in the company’s history, costing more than $10 million over a six-month period. Steve Ballmer excited attendees with a chant of “Windows, Windows, Windows.” Within two weeks, the company sold 100,000 copies of the new operating system. More than four million copies were distributed in its first year, leading to the release of more than 1,200 Windows-based commercial applications from other developers. After an additional year, over 10 million Windows operating systems had been installed, and total commercial applications reached 5,000.
In addition to technical advances, the arrival of Windows 3.0 included an important first: the introduction of the colorful Windows logo. Within weeks the logo began appearing on products from Microsoft and other software companies, as well as on hardware products “Ready to Run” Windows. Along with Windows 3.0, in 1990 Microsoft committed itself to updating its Windows-based applications including Microsoft Excel, Word, and PowerPoint. This set the stage for two major milestones in 1991: with revenue of $1.2 billion, Microsoft became the first personal computer

 

Page 3 | Cash is King
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
software company to exceed $1 billion in sales in a single year, and for the first time more than half of all revenues came from applications instead of systems products.
MARKET MATURATION AND EXPANSION OPPORTUNITIES
In 1989, the company announced the formation of a Multimedia Division to develop multimedia systems software and consumer products. Then, in late 1990, Microsoft established a consulting services group called Information Technology Integration Services to serve large corporate customers seeking to use Microsoft products to integrate complex information systems.
During the 1990s, the success of Windows multiplied with each consecutive version, driven by innovations, increasingly faster and cheaper microprocessors, and growth in personal computer sales of 20%-30% annually. Rather than focusing solely on its core software and operating system businesses, however, Microsoft’s success provided the currency to explore new opportunities, which the company accessed both organically and through acquisitions, as summarized in Exhibit 2.
The rapidly rising use of the internet was responsible for other important expansion opportunities. The final version of Internet Explorer 2.0 was made widely available for downloading at no charge to licensed Windows 95 users. Also in 1995, the Microsoft Network (MSN) was launched, offering a variety of online services and content. And in 1996, MSNBC made its debut as a 24-hour news, talk, and information network from NBC News and Microsoft, with MSNBC on the internet as a companion news and information service. Finally, recognizing an opportunity to make use of its experience in computer gaming technologies, in 2001 Microsoft introduced the Xbox, the only
system on the market designed from the ground up to deliver a complete online gaming experience.


Business Environment, Opportunities and Challenges
From the earliest days of personal computers the industry had experienced explosive growth. In 2004, software was a $200+ billion industry. Exhibit 3 provides comparable companies’ financial data. While Apple was the first to produce a workable personal computer, IBM had used its brand name and product quality to capture the lion’s share of the market. However, IBM’s dominance of
the market began to erode in the late 1980s with the proliferation of cheap and reliable clones. By the early 1990s, thousands of manufacturers were building personal computers around two standard building blocks: the Microsoft Windows operating system and Intel microprocessors. As a result, Microsoft’s growth in the 1990s depended on personal computer sales to households, businesses, and educational institutions. By 2004, the worldwide number of PC users had grown to over 600 million, and Microsoft expected the worldwide base of users to expand to one billion by 2010.
Vertically integrated manufacturers such as IBM and Apple had founded the personal computer industry, but the “de-verticalization” of PC manufacturing in the 1990s set the stage for Microsoft’s meteoric ascent. The success of the Windows operating system allowed the company to establish itself as the industry standard-bearer, using its dominance in operating systems along with software

 

Cash is King | Page 4
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
complements to solidify its market-leading position. To maintain its competitive position Microsoft would have to contend with a host of opportunities and challenges, from the popularization of the internet to the rise of open source software to legal challenges.
BUSINESS SEGMENTS AND COMPETITION
Microsoft distributed products and services primarily through three channels: original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), distributors and resellers, and online.1 Microsoft had OEM agreements with virtually all of the major PC manufacturers. Under similar arrangements, the company also marketed and licensed certain server operating systems, desktop applications, hardware devices and consumer software products to OEMs. Microsoft distributed finished products primarily through independent non-exclusive distributors, authorized resellers and retail outlets, and also licensed software to organizations under agreements that would allow the customer multiple licenses without having to acquire separate packaged products through retail channels. Finally, Microsoft distributed online content and products through MSN and other online services.
The company’s customers included individual consumers, small and medium-sized organizations, enterprises, governmental organizations, educational institutions, Internet Service Providers, application developers, and OEMs. Consumers and small and medium-sized organizations obtained Microsoft products primarily through resellers and OEMs. Sales to Dell and its subsidiaries
accounted for approximately 10% of fiscal year 2004 revenue and were made primarily through OEM and volume licensing agreements. No single customer accounted for more than 10% of revenue in 2002 or 2003.
In 2004, Microsoft was operating under seven business segments designed to allocate resources internally and provide a framework to determine management responsibility: Client, Server and Tools, Information Worker, Microsoft Business Solutions, MSN, Mobile and Embedded Devices and Home and Entertainment. Recent segment financial results are provided in Exhibit 4. Each segment had its own sphere of influence and competition, while the organizational structure was integrated, with operating costs from one segment often benefiting other business units.
By 2004, several fundamental changes threatened to disrupt the economics of traditional software business models. Former rivals were forced to cooperate to integrate applications and content in response to the growing consumer demand for “always on” connected devices. Software users were demanding lower cost business applications and greater compatibility between different systems. And most importantly, traditional software companies were finding it increasingly difficult to compete  with more efficient open source sales and marketing models.





 

1 The Appendix provides a more detailed summary of Microsoft’s business segments and competition, based in part on quotations from Microsoft’s 2004 10-K.

 

Page 5 | Cash is King
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
THE OPEN SOURCE THREAT
The term “open source” refers to software for which the underlying source code is available for  public use and alteration. Advocates believed the organized, collaborative nature of open source projects could create better software. Running on Linux and Intel processors, open source  applications were proving attractive to small- and mid-size businesses which could not previously afford the “industrial strength” applications offered by the large vendors. Whereas traditional vendors had lengthy sales cycles and complicated licensing terms, companies offering open source  alternatives were succeeding with lower marketing budgets, enticing new customers with free trials. 2
The open source movement was making key advances. IBM’s endorsement of Linux had accelerated its acceptance as an alternative to both traditional Unix and Windows server operating systems.
Linux’s competitive position also benefited from the large number of compatible applications offered by leading commercial and non-commercial software developers, such as Novell and Red Hat. In 2003, Sun Microsystems announced a deal with a Chinese software consortium to put Sun’s desktop software system, based on open source programs including Linux, in 500,000 to 1 million computers in China that year. In addition, the government of Brazil, citing Microsoft’s high licensing fees, signed a deal with IBM to foster Brazilian use of Linux and open source programs.
In a June 2003 memo to employees, Steve Ballmer underscored Microsoft’s belief in its method of developing software. “While the non-commercial model may lead to many flavors of software, getting broad, consistent innovation requires coordination across many technology components... In the event of needed enhancements or fixes, the Linux development community, no matter how well- intentioned, simply cannot advance Linux the way we can and must innovate in Windows.”3
LEGAL CHALLENGES
Microsoft’s many legal battles during the 1990s and the beginning of the new millennium were spurred on by the extraordinary success of each consecutive version of the Windows operating system, and by the company’s aggressive forays into adjacent technologies.4 The company’s legal troubles began in earnest in 1988, when Apple filed a “look and feel” copyright suit against
Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard, seeking to prevent the companies from using graphical user interface elements that were similar to those in certain Apple operating systems. Apple lost all claims in the lawsuit, but for Microsoft the action was only the first battle in a long, drawn-out legal war.
The company confronted allegations of anti-competitive business practices, as complaints from competitors and customers motivated regulatory oversight in both the U.S. and Europe. In June 1990, Microsoft became the subject of a U.S. Federal Trade Commission investigation into its cooperative relationship with IBM. This investigation was widened to include the use of restrictive licensing

 

2 “Fundamental Changes Will Disrupt the Software Industry,” Rikki Kirzner, Hurwitz & Associates Research, January 17, 2006.
3 “Open Source's Threat to Microsoft is Growing,” Todd Bishop, Seattle Post-Intelligencer, November 18, 2003.
4 The Appendix provides a more detailed summary of Microsoft’s legal challenges, based in part on quotations from Microsoft’s 2004 10-K.

 

Cash is King | Page 6
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
practices in connection with Windows and was transferred to the Antitrust Division of the U.S. Department of Justice in July 1993. This scrutiny culminated on May 18, 1998 when the U.S. Department of Justice, 20 states, and the District of Columbia filed antitrust actions against  Microsoft. On April 3, 2000 district court Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson ruled against Microsoft, concluding that the company had violated the Sherman Act: Microsoft “maintained its monopoly power by anti-competitive means…, attempted to monopolize the web browser market with Internet Explorer 4.0, and unlawfully tied its web browser to its operating system.”5 On June 7, 2000 the  judge ordered that Microsoft be divested into two “Baby Bills”: one company that would control software for Internet Explorer and business applications, such as the Microsoft Office suite, and another separate company that would market the Windows operating systems. On June 28, 2001, though affirming most of the liability, the federal court of appeals reversed the breakup order penalty, and the Department of Justice announced in September 2001 that it would no longer seek the breakup of Microsoft. These resolutions reduced the likelihood that Microsoft’s ability to profit from innovation and to monetize its intellectual property investments through its current business model would be adjudicated away. The November 2002 consent decree from the U.S. District Court, affirming Microsoft’s settlement with the U.S. Government, was perhaps the most important step forward in clarifying Microsoft’s legal and business risks.
Between 2002 and July 2004, fines and settlements amounted to some $4 billion in antitrust and class action cases; by July 2004 analysts estimated their future potential liability at only $1-$2 billion.
Though there was still lack of resolution from the European Commission, Microsoft offered the following summary as of July 20, 2004: “We have resolved the large majority of our legal issues, which the company has always said was a prerequisite to addressing our cash management plans,” said Brad Smith, Microsoft’s general counsel. “While we still have a number of legal issues and we take them seriously, we have reduced the legal uncertainties facing the company, and we have a much clearer understanding of the potential risks involved in the cases that remain, such as the ongoing European Commission case.”6
MICROSOFT’S CASH POLICY
In 1990, Microsoft became the first software company to generate $1 billion in revenue in a single year. By 1994, annual revenue exceeded $4 billion, and the company’s cash balance stood at $3.6 billion. With the introduction of successive Windows versions and other new products, during the remainder of the 1990s Microsoft would continue to report extraordinary growth. But the company’s success raised the question of how to manage its rapidly ballooning cash balance, highlighted in Exhibit 5 (the income statement), Exhibit 6 (the balance sheet) and Exhibit 7 (the statement of cash flows).



 

5 U.S. v. Microsoft Corporation, Civil Action No. 98-1232, U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, 2000.
6 MSFT Proxy Statement, Brad Smith, Microsoft General Counsel, July 21, 2004.

 

Page 7 | Cash is King
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
The company’s cash policy reflected Gates’ conservatism, a legacy of its days as a start-up. Steve Ballmer recalled the company’s period under Gates’ leadership: “Our first major row came when I insisted it was time to hire 17 people. He claimed I was trying to bankrupt him.” Conservative in his spending, Gates dictated that the company must always have enough money in the bank to operate for a year with no revenues.7
CFO John Connors explained their strategic rationale:

The first thing is to keep enough cash on hand to give us flexibility to manage things like a severe short-term economic dislocation or investment opportunities. We have a relatively unique business model, in that our business is not capital-intensive. We don’t want to be in the position where we have to make decisions because of the balance sheet. And while we don’t anticipate that we would ever have a year with expenses but no revenue, we’ll probably keep at least one year of operating expenses and cost of goods sold in cash on hand—that’s around $20 billion in cash and short- term investments.
We also want to have enough for acquisitions. We have made a series of acquisitions, some of them for cash. And while most have been small, we also want to be able to make some game-changing investments if we so choose. Any large acquisition would likely be a combination of cash and equity.8
As Microsoft’s war chest grew, management realized that to satisfy both investors and the company’s strategic objectives they would have to institute clear portfolio management objectives and processes. Through the beginning of 2000, the company had invested principally in investment grade securities, with a preference for highly liquid short-term investments. As the portfolio swelled, however, the menu of options expanded to include commercial paper, municipal bonds, mortgage-backed
securities and equities, as detailed in Exhibit 8. Microsoft instituted a sophisticated asset allocation and hedging program with the aim of producing returns in excess of yields on risk-free alternatives. Their strategy was supported by multi-currency lines of credit used for foreign currency hedging and working capital requirements.
In January 2003, Microsoft announced a dividend of $0.04 per share quarterly ($0.16 per share annually)—its first-ever dividend—and a two-for-one stock split, which according to Connors were intended to make MSFT shares more attractive to a broader range of investors. The company was responding to requests for a dividend from existing shareholders as well as from pension funds and other institutions whose investment rules prevented them from holding stocks that did not pay a dividend.9 Justifying the decision to investors, Connors cited Microsoft’s continuing financial

 

7 “Microsoft,” International Directory of Company Histories, vol. 63, 2004, p. 294.
8  Finance 2.0: An Interview with Microsoft’s CFO, McKinsey on Finance, Winter 2005.
9 “Microsoft To Pay Dividend For First Time,” Richard Waters, Financial Times, January 17, 2003.

 

Cash is King | Page 8
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
strength and the resolution of outstanding legal issues.10 Additionally, Connors had hinted that future dividends could be higher, calling the initial payout “a good start.”


Developing the 2004 Plan
With its balance of cash and marketable securities on track to double within three years, the
resolution of a large portion of the company’s legal uncertainties, and changes in the tax code making dividends more attractive, pressure to adjust the company’s payout policy was mounting both internally and externally. The majority of Microsoft’s Board of Directors saw change as inevitable, but Gates and Ballmer remained vocally opposed to any additional cash distribution.
Having survived long periods during which their key competitors had stumbled or disappeared because of competition, regulation, or some combination of the two, their conservatism might have bordered on paranoia: They feared that somebody was out there in their garage developing the next big thing which could kill Microsoft. Having built a “miracle business,” they were acutely aware that luck had played a huge part in the company’s success, and that the engine could be fragile. Sun Microsystems had recorded $1 billion in charges for headcount reductions, facility exits and other cost cutting between 2001 and 2003, and Novell had recorded some $450 million in charges between 1996 and 2004 related to restructuring activities and asset impairment. Even the once-mighty IBM had been humbled by competition and regulatory action. In 1969, the Department of Justice had filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court, alleging that IBM violated Section 2 of the Sherman Act by attempting to monopolize the market for general purpose electronic digital computer systems, or computers designed primarily for business. The case was dismissed in 1982 without merit, but during the remainder of the decade IBM fell prey to competitive pressures, as new entrants learned to make comparable machines more cheaply.
Gates and Ballmer felt they needed to protect Microsoft’s ability to grow and to innovate, and the cash was like a security blanket. In the extreme, what if the Windows franchise died? What if a new technology was invented that made the personal computer obsolete? In a competitive battle, their cash would allow them to out-invest the competition by ten times.
The longer management took to propose a solution, the more inclined Microsoft directors became to take unilateral action. Against this backdrop of heightened tensions within the organization, Ballmer asked Cassius King to assemble a team to make a formal recommendation to the Board. The team  was asked to analyze the advantages and disadvantages of a special dividend and to consider all other viable cash distribution methods as well.



 

10 “Microsoft, Awash in Cash, Declares Its First Dividend,” Rebecca Buckman, Wall Street Journal, January 17, 2003.

 

Page 9 | Cash is King
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
SHAREHOLDER CONCERNS
Agitation among Microsoft investors for better returns on equity had been mounting for years. Exhibit 9 summarizes Microsoft’s large shareholders. With internal growth slowing and nearly 20% of the company’s equity value tied up in cash and equivalents, the investment community was clamoring for direction from management on Microsoft’s treasury portfolio investment strategy.
Exhibits 10 and 11 quote prevailing bond yields. The company generated nearly $1 billion per month in excess cash and investors believed the problem would only get worse. Many expressed concern that with so much liquid capital at their disposal management might be tempted to make ill -advised investments. Others openly questioned the insurance value of such a large stockpile. According to one Institutional Shareholder Services representative, “[Microsoft’s cash hoard could not simply be a ‘rainy-day fund,’] because if it is, then they’re expecting something along the lines of Noah.”11
Yet even among shareholders there was disagreement about how to most intelligently deploy the company’s capital, and in the case of a payout how to optimize the distribution mechanism. A growing base of value-oriented investors argued for the institution of a dividend in line with the S&P 500 dividend yield, provided in Exhibit 12, while growth investors preferred share repurchases.
Microsoft had been aggressively repurchasing shares since the 1990s, though they had never publicly targeted a specific dollar amount to repurchase. Still others advocated a one-time special dividend, arguing that the size of the distribution would be too large for either of the other options.
CHANGES IN TAX TREATMENT
Shareholders had also expressed concern for the tax consequences of Microsoft’s decision. Under the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 (JGTRRA), a special dividend would qualify for the new 15% individual dividend tax rate provided Microsoft had sufficient earnings and profits, and provided that the shareholder had held the stock for more than 61 days during the 121-day period beginning 60 days before the ex-dividend date. This new 15% rate was the same as the existing tax rate on long-term capital gains. However, a special dividend might also be treated as “extraordinary” in the hands of some shareholders if the dividend represented more than 10% of the shareholder’s adjusted cost basis in the stock. In this case, any loss on the subsequent sale of the shares might be treated as a long-term capital loss.12 King believed the capital loss condition outlined in the tax code was not germane to any of Microsoft’s key shareholder constituencies. King was, however, wary of the temporary nature of the JGTRRA, which was set to expire in 2008.
EMPLOYEE CONCERNS
Any change in the firm’s investment and payout policies affected not only employee compensation but also the very culture, values and direction of the organization. Microsoft had been built by employee owners, and according to the corporate mythology the company had made millionaires out

 

11 “A Cash-Rich Microsoft Faces Shareholder Call for Dividend,” Rebecca Buckman, Wall Street Journal, January 2, 2002.
12 “Microsoft’s Special Dividend: A Few Tax Facts to Keep in Mind,” Pat McConnell, Janet Pegg, Chris Senyek,
Dane Mott, Bear Stearns Research, July 21, 2004.

 

Cash is King | Page 10
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
of secretaries through its liberal use of stock options in compensation packages. Nonetheless, according to Ballmer, recently “People [had] been less happy about the equity-compensation side of the equation than almost anything else in their employment here.”13
For employees who were unable to exercise their options before MSFT shares lost nearly half of their value (beginning in December 1999), the likelihood that their options would ever expire in the money seemed remote. Exhibit 13 provides historical price volatility and Exhibit 14 details outstanding employee stock options. At issue was a question fundamental to Microsoft’s corporate identity: could an options-based compensation regime reasonably be expected to produce the same levels of reward and incentive as it had in the past? If so, how would outside investors view the dilutive effect of the options? And if not, what alternatives were available?
In fact, neither outside investors nor employees were ambivalent about the company’s stock options program. The recent spate of corporate accounting scandals had created momentum for change, and in fiscal 2004, Microsoft began relying on stock grants over options. The company hoped this change would help to attract and retain the best employees, and that it would better align employee interests with those of Microsoft shareholders. Additionally, effective July 1, 2003, Microsoft began
expensing stock-based compensation under the fair value recognition provisions of SFAS 123, Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation. Microsoft hoped the policy changes would ease some of the pain of an extended bear market, even though it would also reduce the employees’ chances of becoming fabulously rich.
With 632 million options—or 79% of all options outstanding—currently under water, the company still had to consider the impact of higher dividends, or a large one-time distribution, on employee incentives. Some options carried exercise prices as high as $59, compared to a current share price in the range of $27.14 This was already a huge source of angst among employees, and a higher dividend would only worsen matters, as the strike price of their stock options would not automatically adjust for the loss in equity capitalization. Furthermore, many employees felt that the cash belonged to Microsoft, not to its shareholders, and they openly wondered if the company had exhausted its investment opportunities. If Microsoft were to pay a large extraordinary dividend, King felt they would have no choice but to adjust the strike prices on employee options, as detailed in Exhibit 15. The company did not intend, however, to make any adjustment for increases in the regular dividend.
REINVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES
Microsoft certainly had alternative uses for its accumulating cash. Since 2000, the software M&A cycle had been slow because of a pullback in venture funding and an uneven market for new issues, but acquisition opportunities were bound to reappear for any and all of Microsoft’s business units as the economy continued to strengthen. Additionally, management had identified many opportunities

 

13 “Microsoft Will Award Stock, Not Options, to Employees,” John Markoff, David Leonhardt, New York Times, July 9, 2003.
14 “Ballmer Breaks Silicon Valley Taboo,” Tom Foremski, Richard Waters, Financial Times, July 9, 2003.

 

Page 11 | Cash is King
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
for organic growth; Microsoft had originally budgeted $6.8 billion for 2004 research and development, a number that had doubled since 2000.15
The shift to stock-based compensation challenged whether Microsoft was still a growth company—a common question in the press that employees had been asking themselves. Was Microsoft making a transition from a growth-oriented technology company, widely considered one of the most attractive places to work, to a more mature company that must fight to keep talented employees who are tempted by the riches they could find at a start-up venture? If so, what threat could be so large as to require a $60 billion cash balance as insurance? How much cash did they really need to run the business? How much did they need to ensure liquidity for future investments or acquisitions?
Before announcing its plans, Microsoft would also have to weigh the pros and cons of deviations from their current payout policy. If the company took a decision that did not include a higher regular dividend, how would the market react? Should the firm commit to repurchase its shares to signal that they were confident in their future prospects and that they had not exhausted their investment opportunities? Microsoft had implemented numerous stock splits in the past, most recently a two-for- one stock split in early 2003, leading King to wonder whether the stock price was still within the best trading range for potential investors.


Microsoft’s Decision
Cassius King considered the solution they had reached as a group. He had been an integral part of the team that encouraged, cajoled, and ultimately convinced Gates—Microsoft’s founder, its single largest shareholder, and his boss—to step out of his comfort zone and approve the largest corporate cash payout in history. The plan had something for everyone: a massive one-time special dividend, a doubling of the annual dividend, and a commitment to repurchase an enormous number of shares.
How would Microsoft’s shareholders, its employees, the capital markets, and the competition respond? Cash may be king, but whether this cash disbursement plan would succeed royally remained to be seen.












 

15 “Microsoft Meeting Looks at Legal, Security Issues,” Paula L. Stepankowsky, Dow Jones Newswires, November 11, 2003.

 

Cash is King | Page 12
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
The Press Release
JULY 20, 2004


Microsoft Outlines Quarterly Dividend, Four-Year Stock Buyback Plan, And Special Dividend to Shareholders
Company Is Confident About Future Growth and Innovation Opportunities, Plans to Provide Up to
$75 Billion in Value to Shareholders Over Next Four Years

REDMOND, Wash. July 20, 2004 Microsoft Corp. today announced that its board of directors approved an $0.08 per share quarterly dividend, plans to buy back up to $30 billion of the company’s stock over the next four years, and a special one-time dividend of $3 per share.
“We are confident in our long-term ability to grow revenue, profits and shareholder value through our innovation and execution. We have been successful in addressing a significant portion of our ongoing legal exposure, and all seven of our businesses are growing,” said Steve Ballmer, Microsoft’s chief executive officer. “We will continue to make major investments across all our businesses and
maintain our position as a leading innovator in the industry, but we can now also provide up to $75 billion in total value to shareholders over the next four years.”
“As we looked at our cash-management choices, our priorities were to increase our regular payments to shareholders, increase our stock-buyback efforts given our confidence in the company’s growth prospects, and distribute additional resources in the form of a special one-time dividend,” Ballmer added.
This payout will not affect Microsoft’s commitment to research and development to fuel growth in the years ahead. “We see incredible potential for our innovation to help businesses, individuals and governments around the world accomplish their goals, and we will continue to be one of the top innovators in our industry as evidenced by the fact that we will file for more than 3,000 patents this fiscal year,” said Bill Gates, Microsoft’s chairman and chief software architect.
In the past two years, Microsoft has made significant progress in resolving many of the legal issues facing the company including the recent U.S. Court of Appeals decision reaffirming its settlement with the Department of Justice, most of the state class-action lawsuits, and the AOL and Sun Microsystems cases along with patent claims such as the InterTrust litigation. Resolving these issues marks an important step forward in clarifying Microsoft’s legal and related business risk.
“We have resolved the large majority of our legal issues, which the company has always said was a prerequisite to addressing our cash management plans,” said Brad Smith, Microsoft’s general counsel. “While we still have a number of legal issues and we take them seriously, we have reduced
the legal uncertainties facing the company, and we have a much clearer understanding of the potential risks involved in the cases that remain, such as the ongoing European Commission case.”

 

Page 13 | Cash is King
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
Under the plan approved by the Microsoft board today, the company will move from its current annual dividend of $0.16 per share to a quarterly dividend of $0.08 per share, which would essentially double the annual dividend to approximately $3.5 billion, if continued at that level. As a reflection of the company’s strong financial outlook, the board also approved plans to buy back up to
$30 billion in Microsoft stock over the next four years. The company will also pay a one-time special dividend of $3 per share, or $32 billion, subject to shareholder approval of stock plan amendments that will allow certain adjustments to employee equity compensation awards to offset the impact of this large one-time payout. These steps would represent a combined total value to shareholders of up to $75 billion over the next four years, if quarterly dividends continue at the new level.
The quarterly dividend will be payable on Sept. 14, 2004, to shareholders of record on Aug. 25, 2004. The special dividend will be payable on Dec. 2, 2004, to shareholders of record on Nov. 17, 2004, conditioned upon shareholder approval of amendments to the employee stock plans at the annual shareholders meeting currently planned for Nov. 9, 2004.
Because the company’s employee stock plans did not contemplate a one-time special dividend, the board has approved adjustments, subject to shareholder approval, that will protect employees as the share price declines due to the one-time special dividend. Mathematically, after a company makes a large one-time distribution, the overall value of the company declines by the amount of the distribution, which in turn reduces the stock price by a similar amount. If amendments to Microsoft stock plans authorizing the adjustments are not approved by shareholders this fall, the special dividend would not be made, and the board and management would consider other alternatives.
“The innovations our employees have created over the years have made our company successful, and our stock compensation programs have been a critical part of our ability to create this shareholder value,” Ballmer said. “Adjusting the stock options and unvested stock awards held by our employees to offset the impact of the special dividend is a fair and logical step to ensure that our employees are not inadvertently disadvantaged by it. Our request that our shareholders approve the plan changes reflects our commitment to open interaction with our shareholders and good corporate governance.”
The stock buyback program approved by the board authorizes the company to buy back up to $30 billion over the next four years. The specific timing and amount of repurchases will vary based on market conditions, securities law limitations and other factors. The repurchases will be made using Microsoft’s cash resources, and the program may be suspended or discontinued at any time without prior notice.
According to the company’s most recent quarterly report on Form 10-Q, Microsoft had $56 billion in cash and short-term investments as of March 31, 2004. The company generated $15.8 billion in cash flow from operations on revenues of $32.19 billion in fiscal year 2003, the most recent year for  which financial results have been reported.




 

Cash is King | Page 14
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
Appendix: Business Environment, Opportunities and Challenges16
Business Segments and Competition
In 2004, Microsoft was operating under seven business segments designed to allocate resources internally and provide a framework to determine management responsibility: Client, Server and Tools, Information Worker, Microsoft Business Solutions, MSN, Mobile and Embedded Devices and Home and Entertainment.  Each segment had its own sphere of influence and competition, while the organizational structure was integrated, with operating costs from one segment often benefiting other business units.
CLIENT

The Client segment was responsible for the Microsoft Windows operating system and new media technology as well as Microsoft’s relationships with PC manufacturers.  This segment included sales and marketing expenses for the Windows Client operating system and product development efforts for the Windows platform.  The next generation of the Windows operating system, code-named Longhorn, represented a significant investment for the Client business and was still under development in 2004 (with release scheduled for 2006).
In the Client segment Microsoft faced strong competition from well-established companies with differing approaches to the market.  Alternative commercial software products, including variants of Unix, were either licensed or preinstalled by vertically integrated competitors such as IBM, Hewlett- Packard, Apple Computer, Sun Microsystems and others.  The Linux operating system, also derived from Unix and available without payment under a General Public License, had gained increasing acceptance as competitive pressures led OEMs to reduce costs.  Finally, Windows faced competition from alternative platforms that could reduce consumer demand for traditional personal computers.
SERVER AND TOOLS
The Server and Tools business unit was responsible for developing and marketing Windows Server System (server infrastructure software designed to support the Windows Server 2003 operating system).  Products in Server and Tools provided a wide range of capabilities, including messaging and collaboration, database management, e-commerce, and mobile information access.  Through this segment, Microsoft also offered a broad range of consulting services for advanced technology requirements, such as enterprise application planning, architecture and design services, proof-of- concept, custom solutions, and product support services.
Microsoft server operating system products competed with a wide variety of other server operating systems and applications, offered by firms with an array of market approaches.  Vertically-integrated computer manufacturers such as IBM, Hewlett-Packard, Sun Microsystems and others offered their


 

16 The Appendix provides a detailed summary of Microsoft’s business environment, opportunities and challenges
based in part on quotations from Microsoft’s 2004 10-K.

 

Page 15 | Cash is King
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
own variant of Unix preinstalled on server hardware, and nearly all computer manufacturers offered server hardware for the Linux operating system.  Several companies provided competing enterprise- wide computing solutions as well as middleware technology platforms (including IBM, Sun Microsystems), in addition to competing server applications for the PC-based distributed client/server environments (including Oracle, IBM, and Computer Associates).
INFORMATION WORKER
The Information Worker segment included productivity-enhancing products such as the Microsoft Office System of programs, servers, services, and solutions.  Microsoft Office System 2003, the successor to Microsoft Office XP, was released to market in the first half of fiscal 2004 , having evolved from a suite of personal productivity applications to a more comprehensive and integrated system of products designed to increase personal, team, and organization productivity.  Historically, approximately 40 percent of Information Worker billed revenue came from multi-year license agreements with large enterprises.  Revenues from these licenses generally depended upon the number of information workers in a licensed enterprise. As a result, Microsoft’s revenue from this category of agreements was relatively independent of the number of PCs sold in a given year, but rather depended on the number of employees in a given enterprise.
Competing software vendors included Apple, Corel, IBM, Oracle, Sun Microsystems, and local application developers in Europe and Asia.  IBM and Corel had significant installed bases with their office productivity products, and both had aggressive pricing strategies.  Also, Apple and IBM preinstalled certain of their applications on various models of their PCs.  Corel’s application suite and Sun Microsystems’ Star Office were aggressively priced and attractive for OEMs to preinstall on low-priced PCs.  Additionally, the OpenOffice.org project provided a freely downloadable cross- platform application that was gaining popularity in certain market segments.  In addition to traditional client-side applications, Web-based offerings such as SimDesk provided an alternative to Microsoft Office System products.
MICROSOFT BUSINESS SOLUTIONS
The Microsoft Business Solutions segment offered business applications and services for small and mid-market businesses, providing automation for a wide variety of functions including financial reporting, distribution, project accounting, electronic commerce, human resources and payroll, manufacturing, supply chain management, business intelligence, sales and marketing management, customer relationship management, and customer service and support.  This segment consisted of the businesses generated from Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP); Microsoft Customer Relationship Management (CRM); Microsoft Retail Management System (RMS); and other business applications and services.
The small- and mid-market business applications segment was highly fragmented and intensely competitive in all sectors, and Microsoft faced competition from a large number of companies.  Well- known vendors focused on small- and mid-market business solutions, such as Intuit and Sage and others, competed against Microsoft’s Business Solutions segment.  In addition, vendors focused on

 

Cash is King | Page 16
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
large-enterprises, such as Oracle, PeopleSoft, and SAP, were repositioning some of their business applications to work for smaller businesses.  There were thousands of other vendors in specific localities or industries offering their own ERP, CRM, and analytic solutions.
MSN
The MSN segment delivered online services, personal communication services such as e-mail and instant messaging, and information services such as MSN Search and the MSN portals and channels around the world.  MSN managed its own properties, and additionally created alliances with leading third parties for many channels.  Top partners included MSNBC.com, a joint venture between NBC Universal and Microsoft; Foxsports.com, a property of Fox Entertainment Group; or Expedia.com and Match.com, operating units of InterActiveCorp and CareerBuilder.com, respectively.  MSN also provided a variety of paid services such as MSN Internet Access, Premium Web Services, and MSN Mobile services.  This segment generated revenue principally from advertisers on the MSN Web sites, from consumers through subscriptions and transactions generated from MSN Premium Web Services, and from subscribers to MSN narrowband Internet access.
MSN competed with Yahoo!, Google, AOL, EarthLink, U.S. cable and DSL providers, and a vast array of Web sites and portals offering content and online services of all types.  MSN also competed with traditional advertising and print media.
MOBILE AND EMBEDDED DEVICES
The Mobile and Embedded Devices segment was responsible for products extending the Windows platform to mobile and other devices incorporating voice, personal information management, and media capabilities.  Microsoft’s vision for mobile devices was rooted in the convergence of the computing and wireless industries, which brought new opportunities to improve communication and information access for customers.
The embedded operating system market was highly fragmented with many competitive offerings. Key competitors included IBM, Wind River, and versions of embeddable Linux from commercial Linux vendors such as Metrowerks and MontaVista Software.  Windows Mobile software also faced substantial competition from Nokia, Openwave Systems, PalmSource, QUALCOMM, and Symbian.
HOME AND ENTERTAINMENT
The Home and Entertainment segment was focused primarily on new consumer businesses, building on the Windows platform to offer services and applications running on a wide variety of devices in the home.  Products included the Microsoft Xbox video game system, in addition to the Home Products Division (HPD) product lines.  HPD included Microsoft’s line of consumer hardware and software products, such as the Encarta line of learning products and services, the Macintosh applications business, and Microsoft hardware products.
The home and entertainment business was highly competitive and characterized by limited platform life cycles, frequent introductions of new products and titles, and the development of new technologies.  Competing primarily on the basis of price, product quality and variety, timing of

 

Page 17 | Cash is King
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
product releases, and effectiveness of distribution and marketing, key competitors varied in size from very small companies with limited resources to large, diversified corporations with substantial financial and marketing resources.  The Xbox hardware business competed with console platforms from Nintendo and Sony, both of which had a large established base of customers.  The games business also competed with numerous companies licensed by Microsoft to develop and publish software for the Xbox console, including Acclaim Entertainment, Activision, Atari and Capcom.
THE OPEN SOURCE THREAT
By 2004, several fundamental changes threatened to disrupt the economics of traditional software business models.  Former rivals were forced to cooperate to integrate applications and content in response to the growing consumer demand for “always on” connected devices.  Software users were demanding lower cost business applications and greater compatibility between different systems and applications. And most importantly, traditional software companies were finding it increasingly difficult to compete with more efficient open source sales and marketing models.
The term “open source” refers to software for which the underlying source code is available for public use and alteration.  Advocates believed the organized, collaborative nature of open source projects could create better software.  Running on Linux and Intel processors, open source applications were proving highly attractive to small- and mid-size businesses which could not previously afford the “industrial strength” applications offered by the large vendors.  Whereas traditional software vendors had lengthy sales cycles and complicated licensing terms, companies offering open source alternatives were succeeding with lower marketing budgets, enticing new customers with free trials.17
The open source movement was making key advances.  IBM’s endorsement of Linux had accelerated its acceptance as an alternative to both traditional Unix and Windows server operating systems.
Linux’s competitive position also benefited from the large number of compatible applications offered by leading commercial and non-commercial software developers, such as Novell and Red Hat.  In 2003, Sun Microsystems announced a deal with a Chinese software consortium to put Sun’s desktop software system, based on open source programs including Linux, in 500,000 to one million computers in China that year.  In addition, the government of Brazil, citing Microsoft’s high
licensing fees, signed a deal with IBM to foster Brazilian use of Linux and open source programs.

In a June 2003 memo to employees, Steve Ballmer underscored Microsoft’s belief in its method of developing software.  “While the non-commercial model may lead to many flavors of software, getting broad, consistent innovation requires coordination across many technology components,” Ballmer wrote. “In the event of needed enhancements or fixes, the Linux development community,



 

17 “Fundamental Changes Will Disrupt the Software Industry,” Rikki Kirzner, Hurwitz & Associates Research, January 17, 2006.

 

Cash is King | Page 18
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
no matter how well-intentioned, simply cannot advance Linux the way we can and must innovate in Windows.”18

Legal Challenges
UNITED STATES
Responding to a sequence of third-party complaints about “network effects” from a number of Microsoft competitors, in June 1990 Microsoft became the subject of a U.S. Federal Trade Commission investigation into its cooperative relationship with IBM. This investigation was widened to include the use of restrictive licensing practices in connection with Windows and was transferred  to the Antitrust Division of the U.S. Department of Justice in July 1993. A consent decree was negotiated with Microsoft (“the Licensing Decree”) in July 1994, which was followed by numerous court reviews, decision reversals, and petitions. Ongoing scrutiny culminated on May 18, 1998 when the U.S. Department of Justice, 20 states, and D.C. filed antitrust actions against Microsoft.
The antitrust bench trial began on October 20, 1998 and adjourned on June 24, 1999. On November  5, 1999, district court Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson issued his initial “findings of fact” but delayed his “conclusions of law” that Microsoft had violated the Sherman Antitrust Act by engaging in monopolistic business practices, with the company’s actions stifling innovation and hurting consumers. He appointed Richard A. Posner, Chief Judge of the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals, as a mediator to help resolve the case. Microsoft challenged the allegations, stating that “its Windows software [did] not represent a monopoly because the company [did] not control the price or availability of software to run the world’s PC’s.”  After efforts to achieve a mediated solution failed, on April 3, 2000 Judge Jackson ruled against Microsoft, concluding that the company had violated both Sections 1 and 2 of the Sherman Act: Microsoft “maintained its monopoly power by anti- competitive means…, attempted to monopolize the web browser market with Internet Explorer 4.0, and unlawfully tied its web browser to its operating system.”19 On June 7, 2000 the judge ordered
that Microsoft be divested into two (“Baby Bills”) companies: one company that would control software for Internet Explorer and business applications, such as the Microsoft Office suite, and another separate company that would market the Windows operating systems. The proposed legal remedy to break up Microsoft made it extremely difficult to judge what action(s) the Department of Justice would ultimately take to alter the Microsoft business model, or how Microsoft cash flows would be affected. Would the company lose its ability to monetize intellectual property investments? Would the rulings hamper the company’s ability to affect future innovation? Such scenarios could result in economic losses far greater than analysts’ estimates of fines.
On June 28, 2001, though affirming most of the liability, the federal court of appeals reversed the breakup order as penalty, and the D.C. Circuit Court ordered that Judge Jackson be removed from the


 

18 “Open Source's Threat to Microsoft is Growing,” Todd Bishop, Seattle Post-Intelligencer, November 18, 2003.
19 U.S. v. Microsoft Corporation, Civil Action No. 98-1232, U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, 2000.

 

Page 19 | Cash is King
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
case. The Department of Justice announced on September 6, 2001 that it would no longer seek the breakup of Microsoft.
By 2002, Microsoft had begun to resolve many of its legal challenges, “which the company [had] always said was a prerequisite to addressing [its] cash management plans.”20 Most importantly, the resolutions reduced the likelihood that Microsoft’s ability to profit from innovation and to monetize its intellectual property through its current business model would be adjudicated away. The November 2002 consent decree from the U.S. District Court, affirming Microsoft’s settlement with the U.S. Government, was perhaps the most important step forward in clarifying Microsoft’s legal and business risks. The settlement barred Microsoft from participating in exclusive deals that could hinder competition; called for uniform contract terms for manufacturers; and required that Microsoft release specific innovational technical information to rivals. This final term of the settlement was arguably the most important to Microsoft’s future, insofar as it allowed software manufacturers to develop programs for Windows that could compete directly with Microsoft programs.
Between 2002 and July 2004, fines and settlements amounted to some $4 billion in antitrust and class action cases; by July 2004 analysts estimated their future potential liability at only $1-$2 billion.
COMPETITORS AND CUSTOMERS
Before, during and after the U.S. government investigation, Microsoft had to contend with accusations of improper conduct and lawsuits from several competitors and customers.  Many of these suits were precursors to the government’s actions, but others were filed pursuant to the company’s billion dollar settlement.
•	Class Action.  Hundreds of class action lawsuits were originally filed on behalf of consumers and businesses at both the state and federal levels, alleging that Microsoft products were overpriced.  Many state court claims and many of the claims in the federal litigation were dismissed based on a controlling U.S. Supreme Court precedent, and beginning in 2000 Microsoft began a deliberate effort to settle or litigate the remainder of the disputes.  In its bargain with the federal government, Microsoft agreed to provide more than $1 billion in cash, training, support and software to help make computer technology more accessible to public schools serving nearly 7 million economically disadvantaged children. Additionally,
in one of the largest state cases, in January 2003 Microsoft agreed to a $1.1 billion settlement in a series of coordinated class action lawsuits filed in the state of California alleging that Microsoft violated California’s antitrust and unfair competition laws.  The settlement was to benefit consumers and businesses that purchased Microsoft operating system, productivity suite, spreadsheet or word processing software between Feb. 18, 1995, and Dec. 15, 2001, for use in the state of California.  As of July 2004, settlements had been reached in thirteen states and the company believed that any future settlements would be immaterial.


 

 
20 MSFT Proxy Statement, Brad Smith, Microsoft General Counsel, July 21, 2004.
 



Cash is King | Page 20
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
•	Sun Microsystems.  In October 1997, Sun Microsystems filed suit against Microsoft in the
U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California, alleging that Microsoft breached its contractual obligation to deliver a compatible implementation of Java 21, and seeking an injunction to prevent Microsoft from improperly using the Java Compatible logo.  The suit was based largely on the allegation that Microsoft in 1997 developed and distributed a Java virtual machine for use with Windows (the MSJVM) that was incompatible with Sun’s Java specifications.  The 1997 filing was the first action in what would prove to be a protracted legal battle lasting more than six years.  Litigation was finally settled in April 2004 with a broad cooperation agreement.  The settlement included total payments of $1.6 billion to Sun by Microsoft:  $700 million to resolve pending antitrust issues and $900 million to resolve patent issues.  In addition, Sun and Microsoft agreed to pay royalties for use of each other’s technology, with Microsoft making an up-front payment of $350 million and Sun making payments upon incorporating this technology into its server products.
•	AOL Time Warner.  In January 2002, AOL Time Warner’s America Online, Inc. unit filed a private antitrust lawsuit against Microsoft on behalf of its subsidiary, Netscape Communications.  After a year of legal maneuvering, Microsoft agreed to settle the case in May 2003. According to the settlement, Microsoft agreed to pay $750 million to AOL Time Warner and to provide AOL Time Warner’s AOL online service with a new distribution channel for its software to certain PC users worldwide.  In the press release announcing the settlement, Microsoft asserted that “the two companies [would] cooperate to ensure the best possible AOL member experience on current and future Microsoft operating systems, including commitments by Microsoft for technical cooperation and information disclosures.”22
•	RealNetworks.  In December 2003, RealNetworks, Inc. filed suit in federal court against the Microsoft Corporation for violations of federal antitrust laws, alleging that Microsoft had illegally used its monopoly power to restrict competition, limit consumer choice and attempt to monopolize the growing field of digital media.  The complaint alleged that Microsoft had pursued a broad course of predatory conduct over a period of years, resulting in substantial lost revenue and business for RealNetworks.  Whereas Microsoft’s fight with AOL Time Warner had been over internet browsers, RealNetworks alleged that Microsoft used its monopoly power to restrict how PC makers install competing media players while forcing every Windows user to take Microsoft’s media player, whether they wanted it or not.  As of July 2004, the dispute had not yet been resolved.



 

21 Java refers to Sun’s general-purpose programming language designed to be portable to a variety of systems. 22 “AOL Time Warner and Microsoft Agree to Collaborate on Digital Media Initiatives and Settle Pending Litigation,” Microsoft Corporation, May 29, 2003.

 

Page 21 | Cash is King
BY LAURIE SIMON HODRICK*
 
•	Novell.  In 1998, Novell filed suit against Microsoft, accusing the company of using its monopoly position to disrupt sales of Novell’s NetWare product.  In addition to direct action, Novell supported the case brought by the U.S. Government against Microsoft and was one of the companies whose complaints sparked the European Commission’s investigation into Microsoft in 1998.  As of July 2004, all Novell/Microsoft litigation remained unresolved.
EUROPEAN UNION
Although Microsoft had successfully settled most of its U.S. legal battles, the company remained under pressure from the European Union, which on December 10, 1998 began an investigation very similar to the one within the U.S. Justice Department. After a five year inquiry, on March 24, 2004 the European Commission concluded that Microsoft Corporation had violated European Union competition law by leveraging its near monopoly in the market for PC operating systems to dominate markets for work group server operating systems and for media players.  The Commission levied a fine of $613 million and “ordered Microsoft to disclose to competitors, within 120 days, the interfaces required for their products to be able to ‘talk’ with the ubiquitous Windows OS.”
Microsoft was also required, within 90 days, “to offer a version of its Windows OS without Windows Media Player to PC manufacturers (or when selling directly to end users).”23 Microsoft has appealed the ruling.
